# Lanskern Bytecode & Virtual Machine
Lanskern Bytecode & Virtual Machine(refered as LanCode and LanVM) is a bytecode interpreter designed for higher level programming languages. The bytecode is generated by a compiler or assembler and executed by the virtual machine. It's main goal is to make compiled programming languages portable across different platforms.

## VM Architecture
The VM uses a custom 16-bit ISA, similar to the x86 and RISC-V. LanVM supports hypervisor calls, for example, VMEXIT and VMMALLOC. The hypervisor is responsible for managing memory and handling exceptions.

### Registers
- R0-R4: 16-bit General Purpose Registers(Accumulator, B, C, Destination, Source)
- F: 8-bit Flags register
- SP: 16-bit Stack Pointer
- BP: 16-bit Base Pointer
- IP: 16-bit Instruction Pointer
- IV: 16-bit Interrupt Vector

### Memory
The VM has a maximum of 64KB of stack memory(RAM) and program memory. The memory is dynamically allocated. Initially, the VM allocates 1KB of stack memory. A program can allocate more memory using the `VMMALLOC` instruction. The program should check the zero flag to see if the operation was successful after executing `VMMALLOC`. To free memory, use the `VMFREE` instruction and check the zero flag.

## Instruction Set
The LanCode instruction set consists of different types of instructions, for example arithmetic operations, memory operations, control flow instructions, etc. The full instruction set is defined in the [ISA.md](ISA.md) file.

## Graphical Instructions
LanVM has a simple OpenGL 2.1 graphical API. The API allows you to draw lines, rectangles, etc. Currently it's in early stage with no special features.

The API is defined in the [graphics.md](graphics.md) file.

## Assembler
LASM is a simple and small assembler for the LanCode language. Currently it supports labels and comments in the assembly code.

## Speed
The VM is generally faster than interpreted languages such as Python, with a typical 2-3 times performance boost.

## Building
Prerequisites:
- C compiler, such as gcc
- Make, CMake
- Linux
- Windows (MingW32 recommended)

New steps with CMake:
1. Clone the repository
2. Run `mkdir build && cd build`
3. Run `cmake ..`
4. Run `make` or in Windows `mingw32-make`

Old Steps:
1. Clone the repository
2. Run `make` to build the VM. You can use `make vm` and `make asm` to build the VM and LASM respectively.

## Usage

### VM
Run `./build/lanvm <program_file>` to run a program.

### LASM
Run `./build/lasm <input_file> <output_file>` to assemble a program.

## Versioning

LanCode and LanVM follow the semantic versioning scheme:

The format is `MAJOR.MINOR.PATCH`, where:
- `MAJOR` is the major version, which is incremented when new breaking changes are introduced.
- `MINOR` is the minor version, which is incremented when new non-breaking features are added.
- `PATCH` is the patch version, which is incremented when bug fixes or non-breaking changes are introduced.

The version number can include additional information, such as development or special versions, which are denoted by characters at the end of the version number.

For example, version 1.1.0 introduced the graphical instructions.

## Third-Party Libraries
- [GLFW](https://www.glfw.org/) - OpenGL framework
- [GLAD](https://glad.dav1d.de/) - OpenGL loader

## Contributing
Pull requests are welcome. If you have any suggestions or find any bugs, please open an issue.

## License
This project is licensed under the **GNU General Public License v3.0 (GPLv3)**.  
You are free to use, modify, and distribute it under the same license terms.

See the **LICENSE** file for details.